Dr. Stephen Roddy is a critical sound and music computing researcher whose work combines media engineering methods with experimental music practices. Approaching this work through the lens of critical technical practice, he is currently focused on sonification for the Internet of Sounds (IoS) and critical approaches to artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML) in the sonic arts. His work is informed by cybernetics, human-computer interaction, and radical embodied cognitive science. Stephen holds a PhD in Engineering from Trinity College Dublin. He is a member of the Radical Humanities Laboratory and lectures in the Department of Digital Humanities at University College Cork.

Stephen’s previous projects have explored auditory display solutions for large-scale IoT networks, as well as applications of generative systems, cybernetic design principles, and AI/ML techniques in automated music synthesis. This work was carried out under an IRC Postdoctoral Fellowship at CONNECT: the Research Ireland Centre for Future Networks and Communications, and subsequently at the Department of Electronic & Electrical Engineering at TCD. His work is widely disseminated through peer-reviewed journal publications, conference proceedings, and book chapters. He contributed to an IEEE Standards Authority report on ethically aligned approaches to AI in the arts, developed under the IEEE Global Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent Systems.

Stephen maintains an active artistic practice that is central to his research activity, providing a practice-led research context for developing and critically examining the technical systems investigated in his written work. His practice includes music composition and performance, generative and data-driven music, and sound art installation and performance. His most recent musical releases Leviathan, Corpus/Mimesis, and Stardust Sonata are all available through Fiadh Productions. Recent performances and installations of his work have included the ElettroAQustica 10 festival in L’Aquila, the New York City Electroacoustic Music Festival, and the Earth Rising Festival at the Irish Museum of Modern Art.